There might be a possible intermediate step which could help: switch the
`elpa' branch to Git.  Bzr has been problematic mostly for `elpa', so
maybe moving to Git would help, and I think there's a good chance we
might get it past RMS because it's "the only way to work around the bug
in Bzr".

If you can work on that, it might help.  Here's the issue:
`elpa' is a branch that brings together various external unrelated branches.
More specifically, for example `packages/f90-interface-browser' was "bzr
merge"d from https://github.com/wence-/f90-iface.git, and
packages/ioccur was merged from
http://mercurial.intuxication.org/hg/ioccur (which has since moved to Git).

If you can build a new `elpa' branch using Git which keeps those merges
(even better if it records more clearly the source of each such
branch/package), then I think we'd have a good case to move `elpa' to Git.

IIRC ioccur was the only merged branch that used Mercurial (hence merged
using bzr-hg, which basically doesn't work any longer).  The `sml-mode'
package used Svn (i.e. merged via bzr-svn), and I'm not sure if there
are others.  Also, there might be a branch or two that uses Bzr, but
again I can't remember the details.  Most external branches use Git
(i.e. merged via bzr-git).
And most packages have no external branch.

   bzr log --include-merges

would give you the "[merge]" points.  Not all of which correspond to
merges from external branches (some correspond to things like simple
merges of personal/transient feature branches), but that should give you
a starting list of "packages that might be merged from external
branches", so you can search those candidates on the web to see if such
a branch does exist.
